Nature Physics | Volume 22 | January 2026 | 88–93 88
nature physics
Articlehttps://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-025-03099-x
Effective bands and band-like electron 
transport in amorphous solids
 
Matthew Jankousky1, Dimitar Pashov    2, João H. Mazo1, Ross E. Larsen3,4, 
Vladimir Dobrosavljević    5, Mark van Schilfgaarde    6 & 
Vladan Stevanović    1,6 
The localization of electrons caused by atomic disorder is a well-known 
phenomenon. However, under which circumstances electrons remain 
delocalized and retain band-like characteristics even when the crystal 
structure is completely absent, as found in certain amorphous solids,  
is less well understood. Here, to probe this phenomenon, we develop a  
fully first-principles description of the electronic structure and charge 
transport in amorphous materials, which combines a representation of  
the amorphous state as a composite (ensemble) of local environments 
and the state-of-the-art many-body electronic structure methods. Using 
amorphous In2O3 as an example, we demonstrate the accuracy of o 
ur approach in reproducing the band-like nature of the conduction electrons 
as well as their disorder-limited mobility. Our approach reveals the physical 
origins responsible for the electron delocalization and survival of the band 
dispersions despite the absence of long-range order.
In free space, eigenstates of the Schrödinger equation are free particles 
with well-defined momentum ℏ k, which is the constant of motion. 
For an electron moving in a perfectly periodic potential, scattering is 
perfectly coherent. k remains a good quantum number, and by Bloch’s 
theorem, electron states remain delocalized with ℏk reinterpreted as 
the ‘crystal momentum’ . If the potential deviates slightly from perio -
dicity, the Hamiltonian can be partitioned into a large periodic part 
and a weak remainder. In such a case, transport can be characterized 
in terms of electrons propagating in states of quantum number k , with 
scattering between these states treated using perturbation theory. This 
is the usual description of transport in crystalline systems. However, if 
the disorder is strong, the remainder is no longer weak, and the Bloch 
description breaks down, as Anderson discussed in his seminal work1.
There is another, less well-understood possibility: that electron 
states retain their itinerant character even in systems lacking trans -
lational invariance, which this work seeks to address. Amorphous 
systems are the archetypal example of broken symmetry and strong disorder. They have no translational symmetry and typically exhibit 
poor mobility. However, there are exceptions: some amorphous sys -
tems have relatively high electron mobility, such as amorphous In2O3 
(ref. 2), used as an n-type transparent conducting oxide (TCO)3. This 
system is the base material for a variety of TCOs used in a wide range of 
optoelectronic applications, from photovoltaics to consumer electron -
ics (flat panel displays, channels in thin film transistor structures and 
so on)3. Amorphous TCOs are appealing as they allow low-temperature 
processing while remaining homogeneous and without grain bounda -
ries. Surprisingly, their electronic properties are comparable to, and 
sometimes even better than, their (poly)crystalline counterparts. 
Measured electron mobilities of ~10–40 cm2 V−1 s−1 or even higher3–5 
rival those of polycrystalline films and clearly indicate band-like elec-
tron transport in systems without any long-range order. The electron 
mean free paths of 2–6 nm extracted from resistivity measurements 
in a-In2O3 (ref. 2) present another clear indication of the delocalized 
nature of electrons in this system. Although electron delocalization Received: 11 May 2025
Accepted: 16 October 2025
Published online: 17 November 2025
 Check for updates
1Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, Colorado School of Mines, Golden, CO, USA. 2Theory and Simulation of Condensed Matter, 
King’s College London, London, UK. 3Computational Science Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO, USA. 4Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Institute, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA. 5Department of Physics and National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, 
Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL, USA. 6Materials, Chemical and Computational Science Directorate, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 
Golden, CO, USA.  e-mail: vstevano@mines.edu
Nature Physics | Volume 22 | January 2026 | 88–93
 89
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-025-03099-xeither 5- or 6-fold coordinated by O. This is smaller than the crystal -
line bixbyite phase of In2O3, for which each In has six O nearest neigh-
bours, and it is consistent with experiments and molecular dynamics 
simulations4,7,13– 15. The second neighbour In–In shell has an average 
coordination number of 11.5, with the averages of each individual 
structure ranging between 9.1 and 12.7—again, smaller than the 12-fold 
coordination of bixbyite. Of the 12 In–In neighbours in bixbyite, 6 are 
separated by 3.34 Å (edge-sharing In–O polyhedra), while the other 6 
are separated by 3.82  Å (corner-sharing In–O polyhedra). In the random 
structures, there is a bimodal distribution with the two maxima near 
3.4 Å and 3.7 Å , respectively. In the random structures, the O atoms 
have predominantly three or four In nearest neighbours with an aver-
age first-shell coordination of 3.6. All this implies a strong tendency 
of amorphous In2O3 towards In–O coordination, formation of 5- and 
6-fold In coordination polyhedra that are connected in the corner- and 
edge-sharing pattern similar to the crystalline phase. An important 
feature of the amorphous phase, distinct from the crystalline, is the 
presence of a small O–O peak at ~1.5 Å , indicating the presence of O–O 
bonds as also observed in previous studies7,14.
Electronic structure and transport properties in 
the amorphous phase
Within our approach, calculations of the electronic structure of the 
amorphous phase entail calculations of the electronic structure of 
each individual 40-atom structure and subsequent ensemble averag -
ing, making the structural disorder quenched from the point of view 
of electronic structure6. In this way, spatial fluctuations in the electron 
energies are naturally included without the need for large supercells. 
However, while using 40-atom structures allows for high-accuracy but 
computationally demanding QSGW  calculations, performing them for 
the entire set of 1,500 random structures is costly. Hence, the QSGW  
calculations are performed on a subset of 100 structures whose average 
S(q) and the DFT-PBE electronic spectral functions best reproduce the 
same quantities averaged over the entire set of 1,500 structures (see 
the Methods for details). As shown in Supplementary Figs. 8 and 9, the 
subset of 100 structures used in QSGW  electronic structure calcula -
tions reproduces the key structural characteristics of the entire set, 
as well as the electronic density of states at the DFT level of theory. 
This reduction does lead to an increased level of noise in the ensemble 
averages, which, although noticeable, is of relatively small amplitude.
Another important aspect of our approach is the alignment of 
the electronic spectra of different random structures. The picture 
of the amorphous phase as a composite of local environments sug -
gests electrical contact between the environments and, consequently, 
the equilibration of the Fermi energy ( Ef) across the entire sample. 
Because of this, before ensemble averaging, all electronic structures 
are aligned to the same Ef value, which is obtained from the calculated 
electronic density of states (DOS) and the charge neutrality condi-
tion at low temperature (Methods). The validity of this approach 
is evident from Fig. 1d, which shows overall good correspondence 
between the QSGW  calculated, ensemble-averaged electronic DOS 
and photoemission (ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy, UPS) 
experiments16. The features of the valence band of a-In2O3, including 
the main peak and the shoulders at lower energies, agree very well with 
experimental measurements.
This model also lends itself to a procedure for calculating the 
effective electronic (band) structure of the amorphous phase. First, 
the spectral functions A (k, E), measuring the probability of finding 
an electron with energy E and wave vector k, are the quantities being 
averaged. However, because of the random relative orientations of the 
local environments in the composite, A(k, E) must be spherically (iso -
tropically) averaged over all directions of k  before ensemble averaging.
Our results are presented in Fig. 1e, where isotropically and 
ensemble-averaged A(k, E) from QS GW  are shown as a function of 
energy for nine different k values, from k  = 0 to k  = 0.16 inverse Bohr and the existence of band-like features in amorphous solids and liquids 
have previously been discussed, all proposed explanations are largely 
qualitative and/or phenomenological6–8. A complete first-principles 
description that allows for the evaluation of the absolute values of 
disorder-limited electron mobility in amorphous solids is, to the best 
of our knowledge, absent from the literature.
In this Article, we develop a quantitative, fully first-principles 
description of the effective band structure and the disorder-limited 
charge-carrier transport in amorphous solids. The approach uses 
the novel representation of the amorphous state as a composite of 
local environments9, each representing a single microstate of the 
system, corresponding to the small-cell, periodic local minimum on 
the potential energy surface obtained through the first-principles 
random structure sampling10. As we show here, by averaging over the 
properties of individual local environments, the measured structural 
features of a-In2O3 are well reproduced, including the structure factor 
and the local coordination of atoms. More importantly, this repre -
sentation enables the use of state-of-the-art many-body electronic 
structure methods that are free of adjustable parameters, such as 
the quasiparticle self-consistent GW  (QS GW )11, which, in turn, allows 
formulation of an accurate effective (average) band structure for amor -
phous systems, their electronic density of states and the direct evalu-
ation of disorder-limited charge carrier mobility from the broadening 
of the electronic band(s). Furthermore, our approach reveals that 
the survival of the band-like electron transport in a-In2O3 is due to:  
(1) largely retained coordination environment of atoms, (2) their edge- 
and corner-sharing connectivity similar to the bulk and (3) the extended 
and direction agnostic, largely In-s  character of the orbitals forming the 
conduction band. Figure 1 illustrates our approach and key findings.
Amorphous solid as a composite of local 
environments
Here, the structure of the amorphous state is modelled via the 
first-principles random structure sampling that includes: (1) genera -
tion of a large number of structures with a fixed number of atoms, 
random lattice parameters and random atom positions, and (2) their 
relaxation to the closest local minimum on the potential energy surface 
using density functional theory (DFT) methods. Once relaxed, relevant 
properties of individual structures are evaluated and the corresponding 
properties of the amorphous state are obtained via ensemble averaging. 
For a-In2O3 presented here, a set of 1,500 random structures with 40 
atoms are generated and relaxed using the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof 
(PBE) functional12. The number of structures and the cell size were 
chosen large enough so that the statistical sampling was essentially 
independent of the choice (Methods). It is important to note that the 
vast majority of relaxed random structures do not exhibit long-range 
symmetry, as indicated by the space-group-resolved thermodynamic 
density of states shown in Supplementary Fig. 1.
Figure 1b depicts structural features of a-In2O3, including both 
powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) intensity and the structure factor S (q), 
modelled with our approach. The broad feature in the XRD pattern 
of a-In2O3 located between q  = 2 Å−1 and q  = 2.5 Å−1 corresponds well 
to experimental results measured on thin films4. The same is true 
for the structure factor, as illustrated in Fig. 1b , which matches the 
XRD data from ref. 13 . All peaks and their intensities for the range of 
scattering vectors q with relatively low experimental noise are repro -
duced with satisfactory accuracy. Finally, the local coordination of 
atoms calculated from the pair distribution functions (PDF) g (r) shown 
in Fig. 1c agree well with those reported in the literature from both 
experiments4,13 and molecular dynamics simulations7,14. The general 
shape of the partial PDFs follows that of the crystalline In2O3 (bixbyite 
structure), with some differences in the coordination numbers.
In each random structure, In atoms have, on average, between 
4.4 and 5.8 O atoms in their first coordination shell, with an ensem -
ble average of 5.3. This indicates that the majority of In atoms are 
Nature Physics | Volume 22 | January 2026 | 88–93 90
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-025-03099-xradii (a−1
0). The dispersion in the conduction band (red-highlighted 
region) is clearly visible. A more detailed view is provided in the heat 
maps in Fig. 1f , showing the curvature of the conduction band and the 
associated energy broadening. These results allow quantification of 
the dispersion E (k) and the broadening ΔE . From there, the electron 
effective mass m *, relaxation time τ  and disorder-limited mobility μ  are 
evaluated using the standard expressions
τ=1
2ℏ
ΔE,μ=|e|τ
m∗. (1)
The following numerical results are obtained. The electron effective 
mass computed from the effective band structure is m * ≈ 0.2 m0, almost 
identical to the value for the crystalline In2O3, calculated using the 
same procedure as m * = 0.22 m0. Reported experimental values for the 
samples exhibiting n-type (electron) conductivity, due to a combina-
tion of self- and Sn-doping3, fall in the range 0.18–0.33 m0 (refs. 17 ,18). 
For the k  points near Γ , nearly uniform broadening of ΔE  = 0.25 eV is 
found. These values result in an electron mobility of μ ≈ 13 cm2 V−1 s−1. 
Finally, by taking electron concentrations in the range of 1020–1021 cm−3, 
typically reported from transport measurements3, we estimate the 
disorder-limited electron mean free path to be 1–3 nm, which amounts 
to ~5–15 In–O bond lengths.
The calculated mobility corresponds very well to the experimental 
mobilities measured for a-In2O3 deposited at low temperatures19. Gen -
erally, measured mobilities start at ~10 cm2 V−1 s−1 for a-In2O3 thin films deposited at −100 °C to −50 °C and then increase to ~60 cm2 V−1 s−1 as 
the deposition temperature increases19. The reasons for this increase 
are discussed below.
Upon studying relationships between the electronic structure of 
individual random structures and their atomic arrangement, one finds 
that the most important feature influencing the electronic structure 
is whether the atomic arrangement contains O–O bonds. Among the 
full 1,500 structures, 54% contain one or more O–O bonds (52% in the 
smaller sample used for QSGW  calculations). All structures without 
O–O defects exhibit a highly dispersive conduction band with low 
broadening. If one averages the spectral functions only over those 
structures, no ‘mid-gap’ states are observed, and the peaks of the 
spectral functions in the conduction band become sharper, as shown in 
Fig. 2a. By contrast, if only structures with O–O bonds are considered, 
the dispersion breaks down, and the conduction band splits into two: 
one set of states below the Fermi energy and the other above, as seen in 
Fig. 2b. This is primarily because the presence of an O–O bond changes 
the effective electron count in surrounding coordination polyhedra. 
The difference in the degree of localization of the conduction band 
minimum (CBM) states between structures with and without O–O 
bonds is clearly visible from the CBM charge densities of individual 
structures shown in Fig. 2a,b (right).
This different localization can also be seen in the calculated inverse 
participation ratios for the states above and below the Fermi energy, 
shown in Supplementary Figs. 12 and 13. For structures without O–O 
bonds, at energies in a range between ~−2.7 and ~−1.5 eV near the valence 
a b c
d e fQSGW spectral functions (a.u.)
E – Ef (eV)00.040.080.120.16
0.020.060.100.14
k (1/ao) 
–10 –5 0 5 10
E – Ef (eV) 
k (1/ao) 0
0.04 0.08 0.12 0.16∆E
00.51.01.52.0
Amorphous
k (1/ao) 0
0.04 0.08 0.12 0.16CrystallinePowder XRD (a.u.)
q (1/Å) 1 2 3
q (1/Å)4
0 2 4 6 8–1012q (S(q) – 1) (Å–1)
10 12 14ExperimentTheory
g(r)
01001020010In–In
In–O
O–O
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
r (Å)20
E – Ef (eV)-10 -5 0 5 10Electr onic DOS (a.u.)Crystalline
AmorphousCrystalline
Amorphous
Theory (QSGW) amorph.
Exp. (UPS) cryst.Exp. (UPS) amorph.Theory (QSGW) cryst.
Fig. 1 | Approach and key results. a, In our work, the structure of amorphous 
solids is represented as a composite of local environments. b , The calculated 
XRD intensity for crystalline and amorphous In2O3 (top) and the comparison of 
the calculated and measured (from ref. 13) structure factors for a-In2O3 (bottom). 
c, The comparison of the calculated partial PDFs g (r) between crystalline and 
amorphous In2O3. d, The calculated (QSGW ) electronic DOS is shown for both 
amorphous (amorph.) and crystalline (cryst.) In2O3 against photoemission (UPS) 
measurements16,27. Experimental spectra (Exp.) are aligned with calculated DOSs on the same position of the respective main peak in the valence band, and are 
shifted vertically for clarity. e , Calculated (QSGW ) spectral functions as a function 
of electron energy at different k  points. The norms of k  points are shown in the 
units of the inverse Bohr radius (1/ao). f , Spectral functions of the conduction 
band (red rectangle in e ) shown as a heat map; the dispersion E (k) is clearly 
visible, and the energy broadening is labelled. A heat map of the spherically 
averaged conduction band of crystalline In2O3 is also shown for comparison.
Nature Physics | Volume 22 | January 2026 | 88–93
 91
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-025-03099-xband edge, the states are localized. By contrast, all the states in the 
conduction band near 0.5 eV, which lie within a very small tail of the 
density of states, are delocalized. As it is expected that weak disorder 
can localize states near band edges20–22, the observed delocalization 
suggests that the scattering from ideal electronic states caused by 
changes in coordination number without O–O bonds is small—not large 
enough to appreciably localize conduction band states. For structures 
with an O–O bond, we observe delocalized valence band states below 
about −2.0 eV, which become moderately localized at higher energies 
within the valence band, consistent with the idea that localization near 
band edges is preferred. In the conduction band, structures with O–O 
bonds show moderate localization for most states within ~1.5 eV of the 
conduction band minimum, suggesting that the electronic scattering 
associated with the O–O defects is sufficiently strong to localize states 
near the band edge.
Looking at the average densities of states in Fig. 2c, calculated 
separately for structures with and without O–O bonds, supports the 
idea that the electronic properties of the system best reproduce the 
experimentally observed behaviour when treated as a composite of 
the contributions from both types of structure. The density of states 
averaged over all 100 structures is in agreement with the experimental 
UPS measurements in that states at energy lower than the maximum 
peak are concave down, rather than linear or concave up as seen in the 
average over the states with and without O–O bonds, respectively. The 
average including states with and without O–O bonds also exhibits two 
large and two small shoulders at energies lower than the maximum 
frequency, showing much better agreement with the measured UPS 
spectra than the single distinct low-energy peaks observed in the 
densities averaging structures with and without O–O bonds separately.In addition, some fluctuations in the dispersions and the CBM 
position relative to the common Fermi energy can be observed even 
in structures without the O–O bonds. They are responsible for the fine 
peak structure in the conduction band, visible in the Fig. 2a (see red cir -
cle) and contribute to the CBM energy broadening close to the Γ  point. 
Our analysis indicates that they are a consequence of the fluctuations 
in the first-shell In–O coordination (Supplementary Fig. 14). Structures 
with a lower fraction of 6-fold coordinated In atoms exhibit slightly 
higher CBM energies compared with those in which the majority of In 
atoms are 6-fold coordinated.
Finally, both the structures containing O–O defects and those with 
lower fraction of the 6-fold coordinated In, are higher in energy than 
those without O–O and with predominantly 6-fold coordinated In, as 
shown in Supplementary Fig. 14. Consequently, one might expect that 
the fraction of these structures present in the actual samples would 
decrease as the experimental conditions approach thermodynamic 
equilibrium. In other words, averaging over all structures corresponds 
to the experimental situation far away from equilibrium, that is, to the 
thin films grown on cold substrates. Cold substrate conditions in the 
thin-film growth have previously been shown to correspond to ensem -
ble averages at high thermodynamic temperatures23. The effects of 
increasing substrate temperatures can then be modelled by ensemble 
averaging properties across random structures using the Boltzmann 
distribution, assuming the energy of a particular configuration is given 
by the energy of the PBE functional. Lower effective temperature in this 
distribution, corresponding to higher substrate temperatures in thin 
film growth, will lead to the lower concentration of O–O defects and 
4- and 5-fold coordinated In. In turn, this will lead to increased electron 
mobility by reducing the conduction band linewidth.
a bQSGW spectral functions (a.u.)
E – Ef (eV)Without O–O
QSGW spectral functions (a.u.)With O–O
O–O
cQSGW electronic DOS (a.u.)
E – Ef (eV)
E – Ef (eV)
kTeﬀ = 500 K Teﬀ = 1,000 K Teﬀ = 2,000 Kd e
Teﬀ (K)Electron mobility µ (cm2 V–1 s–1)
400 800 1,200 1,600 1,800141822Deposition
temperature–10.0 –7.5 –5.0 –2.5 0 2.5 5.0
–10 –5 0 5 10ExperimentWith O–ONO O–OTotal7.5 –10.0 –7.5 –5.0 –2.5 0 2.5 5.0 7.5
E – Ef (eV)
Fig. 2 | Origin of the conduction band in a-In2O3. a, The spectral functions 
averaged over structures with no O–O bonds and a typical CBM charge density 
of one of those structures. The red circle highlights the region from which the 
charge density is plotted. b , The spectral functions averaged over structures 
that contain O–O bonds and a typical charge density for one of those structures. 
c, The calculated density of states averaged over structures with and without O–O bonds compared with the total DOS and experiment16. d, Heat maps of the 
spectral functions for the conduction bands, with the structures ensemble-
averaged and weighted by the Boltzmann distribution at different effective 
temperatures. e, The calculated electron mobility of a-In2O3 as a function of the 
effective temperature. The correspondence with the experimental deposition 
temperature is indicated.
Nature Physics | Volume 22 | January 2026 | 88–93 92
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-025-03099-xThe spectral functions in Fig. 2d show a decrease in linewidth with 
decreasing effective (ensemble averaging) temperature. Consequently, 
mobility increases with decreasing effective temperature, as shown in 
Fig. 2e, which agrees with the experimental observation that increas-
ing deposition temperature will lead to increased mobility for In2O3 
thin films. The O–O defects and, to some extent, In–O coordination 
lower than 6 provide major perturbations (scattering centres) to the 
conduction band electronic states. Their abundance and the associated 
localization of conduction band states directly correlate with reduced 
electron mobility. This is also evident from Supplementary Fig. 15 
showing the influence of the decreasing effective temperature on the 
mobility computed by taking into account structures with and without 
the O–O separately.
The remaining difference between our low effective temperature 
electron mobility of ~25 cm2 V−1 s−1 and the experimentally observed 
maximum of ~60 cm2 V−1 s−1 in films deposited at ~0 °C is probably 
related to the presence of doping (electrons), which is not accounted 
for in our approach. Electron doping will result in some fraction of 
localized states (for example, those associated with O–O defects) 
being occupied, effectively reducing the number of scattering channels 
and thereby increasing the electron mobility with doping concentra-
tion. In addition, an increase in doping concentration with deposition 
temperature will also lead to higher Fermi velocity and longer electron 
mean free path.
Increasing the deposition temperature to ~25 °C or more leads to 
the appearance of crystalline features in the XRD, which coincides with 
the drop in measured electron mobility from ~60 back to 10 cm2 V−1 s−1 
(ref. 4). Our results may offer an explanation for this drop as a conse-
quence of the misalignment (band offset) of the CBM positions between 
amorphous and crystalline phases evident from Fig. 1f. The amorphous 
and crystalline CBM differ by ~250 meV, creating an effective barrier 
for electron transport. If we imagine having crystalline inclusions in an 
amorphous phase—measured to be in excess of 36% for films depos -
ited at approximately 25 °C or higher4—their presence would lead to 
a drop in mobility due to the band offset. The drop will continue until 
the crystalline fraction is large enough to establish a percolation, at 
which point the mobility will begin to increase with the deposition 
temperature as also observed experimentally4.
It is important to note that most of these discussed phenomena 
are difficult to describe with approaches based on a single, large peri -
odic cell representation of the structure of amorphous solids. First, 
the dispersive electronic bands (if present) will be sharp and free of any 
disorder-induced broadening. Second, the periodic boundary condi -
tions imply the existence of a Brillouin zone, which is inconsistent with 
the notion that waves with progressively higher k  (lower wavelength) 
should scatter more to the point where the band dispersion is completely 
destroyed. This effect is well reproduced in our approach, as illustrated 
by the DFT-PBE spectral functions from Supplementary Fig. 10 calculated 
for a larger set of k  values than in Fig. 1 .
Physical origins responsible for electron 
delocalization and band-like transport
It is worth noting that treating amorphous phase as a collection of 
independent local domains and calculating an effective electronic 
structure as a configurational average can be justified under the fol -
lowing conditions. First, the size of the domains needs to be larger 
than the De Broglie wavelength of conduction electrons, which we 
estimate to be ~2–4 nm from the single parabolic band picture and 
for typical experimental charge carrier (electron) concentrations of 
1020–1021 cm−3. This translates to 2–4 unit cells of our random structures, 
whose linear dimensions are on average ~10 Å . Second, the good overall 
agreement with the measurements indicates that the spatial correla -
tions as well as the electron dephasing length in a-In2O3 are both shorter 
than ~2–4 nm. All this is consistent with both measured and estimated 
electron mean free paths of 2–6 and 1–3 nm, respectively. It is also important to note that our approach can be thought of as analogous 
to the coherent potential approximation24,25, more precisely its cluster 
version26, in which a real potential of disordered system (usually lat -
tice disorder) is replaced by an effective, mean-field potential akin to 
a configurational average.
Next, the survival of the conduction band after both isotropic and 
ensemble averaging indicates that: (1) the highly dispersive conduction 
band is present in a large fraction (~50%) of individual structures despite 
their low symmetry; (2) the spatial anisotropy of the conduction band 
is low for all these structures; and (3) the bonding environments across 
different structures are sufficiently similar to produce finite band gaps, 
a similar number of states in the valence and conduction bands, and a 
low number of mid-gap defect states, all of which lead to comparable 
conduction band energies relative to Ef. O–O bonds are the primary 
defects that break these patterns in amorphous In2O3.
Indeed, a dispersive conduction band of the dominantly In-5 s 
character can be found in all structures without the O–O defects. 
The In-s character is clearly visible from the CBM electron densi -
ties shown in Fig. 2a and the projected densities of states shown 
in Supplementary Fig. 11. Also, the single degeneracy of the CBM 
is another clear indicator of the s -like character of the conduction 
band. This is true for the 100 structures calculated at the QSGW  level 
of theory, and also in the remaining 1,400 (at the DFT level). This is a 
consequence of the atomic coordination environments being similar 
both among themselves and to those in bixbyite. Most of the In atoms 
are 5- and 6-fold coordinated by O, and the O atoms are 3- and 4-fold 
coordinated by In in the random structures. Moreover, the connectivity 
of In coordination polyhedra in each random structure also resembles 
bixbyite; most of them are edge- and corner-sharing. The existence of 
the dispersion then implies similar site energies and strong overlaps 
of the ‘molecular’ orbitals (In-5s -like) forming the conduction band. 
The similarity of the site energies is supported by the observation that 
the inverse participation ratio shows strong delocalization of these 
conduction states (Supplementary Fig. 12).
Furthermore, the extended range and direction-agnostic s -like 
character of the orbitals forming the conduction band means that con -
nected In coordination polyhedra have substantial overlap, regardless 
of their orientation. This effect also contributes to the conduction band 
being largely isotropic in space for each individual structure, leading to 
the low broadening observed after the isotropic average. By contrast, 
the valence band states, composed primarily of less-extended and 
directional O-p orbitals are notably more localized and do not lead to 
any dispersive band-like features, as evident from Fig. 1  and the inverse 
participation ratio analysis in Supplementary Fig. 12. Lastly, similarity 
between building blocks across all random structures implies similar -
ity in the electronic DOS in both valence and conduction states. The 
consequence of this is a similar magnitude of dispersion and similar 
positions of the conduction bands relative to their respective Ef, all 
of which contribute to the relatively low broadening of the effective 
conduction band.
Hence, the existence of the dispersive and relatively sharp conduc -
tion band in more than half of random structures, and by extension in 
our model of the amorphous phase, is due to the strong tendency of 
In2O3 to form certain types of coordination polyhedra, their connectiv -
ity and a low number of defects (wrong coordination environments). 
Similar behaviour can be observed in amorphous/glassy SiO2, with 
corner-sharing Si–O tetrahedra representing the sole building block 
with s-like orbitals forming the low-energy unoccupied states giving 
rise to the existence of a conduction band (Supplementary Fig. 16). The 
s-like character of the conduction band minimum in both SiO2 and In2O3 
is indicated by the single degeneracy of this band. The apparent lower 
dispersion of CB in SiO2 is related to the near absence of edge-sharing 
polyhedra9 and the shorter radius of Si-s orbitals.
In conclusion, by treating amorphous phase as a composite of 
local environments, we can quantitatively describe at the QSGW  level 
Nature Physics | Volume 22 | January 2026 | 88–93
 93
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-025-03099-xof theory the band-like character of the lowest conduction band in 
a-In2O3, including both the effective mass and electron mobility. The 
reasons for the existence of the conduction band despite the absence 
of long-range order include: (1) the extended, direction-agnostic s-like 
character of the orbitals forming the band, which averages over many 
neighbours; (2) largely preserved coordination within polyhedra and 
their connectivity in the vast majority of local environments; and (3) 
a relatively small number of detrimental O–O defects, implying a 
strong tendency to form certain types of coordination environment. 
Similar behaviour of amorphous SiO2 (at the DFT level of theory) 
shown in Supplementary Fig. 16 further supports this conclusion. 
Lastly, the fully first-principles approach presented here for describ -
ing the electronic structure of the amorphous/glassy states is general 
and can be applied to electronic structure properties of disordered 
systems more broadly.
Online content
Any methods, additional references, Nature Portfolio reporting sum-
maries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, 
acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contri -
butions and competing interests; and statements of data and code avail -
ability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-025-03099-x.
References
1. Anderson, P. W. Absence of diffusion in certain random lattices. 
Phys. Rev.  109, 1492 (1958).
2. Bellingham, J., Phillips, W. & Adkins, C. Amorphous indium oxide. 
Thin Solid Films 195, 23 (1991).
3. Shigesato, Y. in Handbook of Transparent Conductors (eds Ginley, 
D.S., Hosono, H. & Paine, D. S.) Ch. 5, 149 (Springer, 2010).
4. Buchholz, D. B. et al. The structure and properties of amorphous 
indium oxide. Chem. Mater. 26, 5401 (2014).
5. Charnas, A. et al. Review—extremely thin amorphous indium 
oxide transistors. Adv. Mater. 36, 2304044 (2024).
6. Stratt, R. M. & Xu, B.-C. Band structure in a liquid. Phys. Rev. Lett.  
62, 1675 (1989).
7. Medvedeva, J. E. et al. Origin of high carrier concentration in 
amorphous wide-bandgap oxides: role of disorder in defect 
formation and electron localization in In2O3−x. J. Appl. Phys. 127, 
175701 (2020).
8. Lee, Y., Hu, Y., Kim, D., Datta, S. & Cho, K. First-principles mobility 
prediction for amorphous semiconductors. Phys. Rev. B 105, 
085201 (2022).
9. Wolf, L., Novick, A. & Stevanović, V. Modeling glasses from first 
principles using random structure sampling. J. Appl. Phys. 137, 
095101 (2025).
10. Stevanović, V. Sampling polymorphs of ionic solids using random 
superlattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 075503 (2016).
11. Faleev, S. V., van Schilfgaarde, M. & Kotani, T. All-electron 
self-consistent GW approximation: application to Si, MnO, and 
NiO. Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 126406 (2004).
12. Perdew, J. P., Burke, K. & Ernzerhof, M. Generalized gradient 
approximation made simple. Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865–3868  
(1996).13. Utsuno, F. et al. Structural study of amorphous In2O3 film by 
grazing incidence X-ray scattering (GIXS) with synchrotron 
radiation. Thin Solid Films 496, 95 (2006).
14. Aliano, A., Catellani, A. & Cicero, G. Characterization of 
amorphous In2O3: an a b initio molecular dynamics study. Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 99, 211913 (2011).
15. Eguchi, T., Inoue, H., Masuno, A., Kita, K. & Utsuno, F. Oxygen 
close-packed structure in amorphous indium zinc oxide thin films. 
Inorg. Chem. 49, 8298 (2010).
16. Öfner, H., Shapira, Y. & Netzer, F. P. Evolution of the In oxide/Si(111) 
interface: analysis by electron spectroscopies. J. Appl. Phys. 76, 
1196 (1994).
17. Nakazawa, H. et al. The electronic properties of amorphous and 
crystallized In2O3 films. J. Appl. Phys. 100, 093706 (2006).
18. Scherer, V. et al. Transport and angular resolved photoemission 
measurements of the electronic properties of In2O3 bulk single 
crystals. Appl. Phys. Lett. 100, 212108 (2012).
19. Buchholz, D. B., Zeng, L., Bedzyk, M. J. & Chang, R. P. Differences 
between amorphous indium oxide thin films. Progress Nat. Sci. 
Mater. Int. 23, 475 (2013).
20. Ziman, J. M. Localization of electrons in ordered and disordered 
systems II. Bound bands. J. Phys. C 2, 1230 (1969).
21. Abou-Chacra, R. & Thouless, D. J. Self-consistent theory of localization. 
II. Localization near the band edges. J. Phys. C 7, 65 (1974).
22. Nichols, C. S. & Winer, K. Localization of band-edge states in 
periodic models of a-Si. Phys. Rev. B 38, 9850 (1988).
23. Caskey, C. M. et al. Synthesis of a mixed-valent tin nitride and 
considerations of its possible crystal structures. J. Chem. Phys.  
144, 144201 (2016).
24. Stocks, G. M. & Winter, H. in The Electronic Structure of Complex 
Systems (eds Phariseau, P. & Temmerman, W. M.) Ch. 8, 463 
(Plenum, 1985).
25. Johnson, D. D., Nicholson, D. M., Pinski, F. J., Gyorffy, B. L. & 
Stocks, G. M. Density-functional theory for random alloys: total 
energy within the coherent-potential approximation. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 56, 2088 (1986).
26. Laad, M. S. & Craco, L. Cluster coherent potential approximation 
for the electronic structure of disordered alloys. J. Phys. Condens. 
Matter 17, 4765 (2005).
27. Brinzari, V. et al. Valence band and band gap photoemission study 
of (111) In2O3 epitaxial films under interactions with oxygen, water 
and carbon monoxide. Surf. Sci. 601, 5585 (2007).
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds 
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with 
the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the 
accepted manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the 
terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited 
2025
Nature Physics
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-025-03099-xMethods
First-principles random structure sampling
A set of 1,500 random In2O3 structures were generated with 40 atoms 
per unit cell in a manner that encourages numerical stability of relaxa -
tions and favours cation–anion coordination10. For each structure, 
random values of lattice parameters (a , b, c, α, β and γ ) are chosen using 
the constraints 0.8×scale ≤ a , b, c ≤ 1.6×scale and 60° ≤ α , β, γ ≤ 140°. 
Atoms are distributed within the cell in a manner favouring cation–
anion coordination and leading to homogeneous initial distribution. 
To achieve this, a grid is generated at the minima and maxima (r) of a 
plane wave cos(G⋅r), defined by reciprocal lattice vectors 
G = n1g1 + n2g2 + n3g3. Cations are placed at the maxima of this wave, 
while anions are placed at the minima. A gaussian is centred on each 
atom, and the next atom placed is placed with higher probability on a 
position where the sum of these gaussians is low. The scale of the struc -
ture is changed so that the minimum distance between atoms is approx -
imately 80% of the In–O bond length in bixbyite.
Once these structures are generated, they are relaxed using the 
PBE exchange-correlation functional in density functional theory 
calculations as implemented in VASP28 code. Ionic relaxations are 
performed using the conjugate gradient algorithm so that structures 
relax reliably to their nearest local minimum. Pseudopotentials are 
constructed from the projector-augmented wave method. The plane 
wave cut-off is 340 eV, and the Γ -centred k-point grid is generated auto -
matically using 20 divisions of the grid. All degrees of freedom, volume, 
cell shape and atomic positions are included during relaxations and are 
restarted at least three times to resolve the real-space grid inaccuracies 
that occur during the volume and cell-shape relaxations. The cell shape 
and volume are considered converged when the hydrostatic pressure is 
less than 0.5 kilobar. Ionic relaxations are considered converged when 
the maximum force on any atom is less than 0.02 eV Å−1.
The PBE exchange correlation functional provides an overall 
good representation of the structure of the crystalline (bixbyite) 
In2O3. The calculated lattice constant a  = 10.29 Å  is 1.7% larger than 
the experimental one of a  = 10.117(1) Å  (ref. 29 ), a usual result for the 
PBE functional, leading to the ~5% overestimation of the volume and 
equal underestimation of the mass density (6.8 versus 7.1 g cm−3). 
The ensemble of random structures used in our representation of 
a-In2O3 produces an average volume of 〈V〉 = 73 Å3 f.u.−1, effective 
cubic lattice constant of 〈 V〉1/3 = 10.53 Å  and mass density of a-In2O3 
of 6.3 g cm−3. The ~7% reduction in the mass density between crystal -
line and a-In2O3 is well within the observed range of values19. When 
averaging is performed using the Boltzmann distribution, the mass 
density increases with decreasing temperature, approaching values 
close to the density of cubic In2O3 (Supplementary Fig. 7), which is 
in good correspondence with experiments that find the same result 
for the films deposited at temperatures just before the crystallinity 
is observed13,19.
Finally, the choice of the 40-atom cells was justified by the con -
vergence of relevant structure functions, namely the structure factor 
S(q) and the PDF g (r), shown in Supplementary Fig. 2. In addition, 
the fluctuations in S (q) and g (r) of individual structures shown in 
Supplementary Fig. 3 illustrate the structural diversity of the set.
QSGW calculations
As noted, to reduce the computational cost, the QSGW  calculations 
are performed on a subset of 100 structures chosen to approximate 
the ensemble averages of both S (q) and the DFT-PBE-calculated 
electronic DOS. The selection procedure uses Pareto optimiza -
tion over 100 randomly chosen sets of 100 structures illustrated in 
Supplementary Fig. 5. The red arrow in Supplementary Fig. 5c points 
to the set used in subsequent calculations, which offers the minimal 
normalized root-mean-square error in the average spectral functions 
and is reasonably close to the lowest normalized root-mean-square 
error in the structure factor S(q).The electronic structure of the subset of 100 of these relaxed 
random structures is computed using QS GW , as implemented in the 
Questaal code11. QSGW  is necessary here because PBE significantly 
underestimates the band gap of In2O3; a starting-point–independent 
correction to the electronic states, as provided by QSGW , yields an 
electronic structure that can be reliably interpreted. Computational 
cost of QS GW  is higher than, for example, hybrid functionals, but so is 
the fidelity and without any adjustable parameters. Self-consistency 
also improves fidelity compared with the more common GW based 
on a one-body Hamiltonian such as PBE, as it is independent of the 
starting point and is not affected by the well-known shortcomings of 
any chosen one-body Hamiltonian. Here, we are interested not only 
in obtaining accurate band gaps but also in the correct positioning of 
the mid-gap defect states. In addition, it is not clear that uniform 1/4 
of Fock exchange added to DFT across all structures is appropriate, 
and obtaining the fraction of Fock exchange self-consistently30 would 
significantly increase computational cost.
In QSGW , the self-energy is quasiparticalized as described in ref. 11,  
that is, the self-energy is treated as a static Hermitian potential, and 
this is iterated to self-consistency, removing the dependence of the 
self-energy on the starting point used for calculating the charge den-
sity. This ensures that errors in the electronic properties are systematic 
and well defined, coming from specific effects not included in the 
random phase approximation, such as electron–hole interactions and 
electron–phonon coupling31. The self-energy is considered converged 
when the root-mean-squared deviation between steps is less than 
4 × 10−5. Electronic states around each atom are approximated using an 
optimized linear muffin-tin orbital basis, and higher energy states are 
approximated with plane waves. The cut-off radius of these different 
basis functions is chosen to include approximately 50 neighbours for 
each atom in each structure. The k-point grid for these calculations 
is chosen such that the number of atoms times the k-point density is 
between 1,280 and 2,560, and the distance between k-point divisions 
along each of the reciprocal lattice vectors is approximately even. The 
G-vector cut-off for basis envelope functions is set to 2.9 Ry1/2, and the 
regular mesh for the smoothed Hankel envelope functions is 8 Ry1/2. 
High-lying elements in the self-energy matrix with energy above 2.8 Ry 
are approximated using plane waves. Smooth Hankel energies for the 
basis set on In and O atoms are optimized to minimize the total energy 
of crystalline In2O3.
Reciprocal space and real space structure functions
The structure functions for each structure and the averages over differ -
ent sets of structures were calculated as detailed in ref. 9 . In brief, the 
total X-ray structure function was computed using the Faber–Ziman 
formalism wherein
SX(q)=1
⟨f(q)⟩2Icoh
a(q)−⟨f2(q)⟩−⟨f(q)⟩2
⟨f(q)⟩2.
Here, q is the scattering vector, and q is its norm. 〈f(q)〉 = ∑αcαfα(q) 
is the average X-ray atomic form factor, where cα is the atomic fraction 
of the atoms of type α and fα(q) is their atomic form factor.
The PDFs between given atom types are computed using
gαβ(r)=⟨1
4πr2ncβdNαβ(r)
dr⟩
α,
where dNαβ(r) is the number of β  atoms in a spherical region with thick -
ness dr at a distance r from a given α atom, and 〈〉α denotes an average 
over all α atoms.
Averaging of the electronic structures
To average densities of states and spectral functions over different ran-
dom structures, we align their electronic spectra on the same Fermi 
Nature Physics
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-025-03099-xenergy. The Fermi energy for each random structure is evaluated using 
the calculated electronic DOS and Fermi–Dirac distribution function, as 
the value that produces charge neutrality between electrons and holes 
at low temperatures. Ideally, this should be done in the limit of T  → 0; 
however, the dispersive nature of the conduction band (low DOS near 
the CBM), the band-gap values of several electronvolts or larger, and the 
discretization of the energy axis necessitate the use of a finite tempera-
ture. In the work presented here, we use kBT, that is 0.1 of the band gap Eg 
(number of electrons or holes ~10−5), as we find values of this magnitude 
provide numerically stable results (kB is the Boltzmann constant). Using 
kBT/Eg between 0.05 and 0.1 produces essentially the same final results, 
whereas lower values begin to introduce numerical noise (with the num -
ber of electrons or holes dropping to the 10−50 range for kBT/Eg = 0.01).
To obtain the spectral functions for each individual structure, a 
k grid consisting of concentric spheres centred on the Γ  point is used. 
These spheres are generated such that the linear density in the azimuthal 
and polar directions are equivalent, and the number of points on each 
sphere grows as k2 so that the surface density of k points is equivalent 
for each value of k . The spectrum for each k point is represented by a 
function with a Lorentzian of width 40 meV at each eigenvalue. These 
spectra are then averaged over all k vectors in a given sphere (that share 
the same norm). One can then average these spectral functions over 
different structures aligned on their Fermi energies as discussed above. 
Artificial broadening from 10 meV to 80 meV in increments of 10 meV 
were tested. A value of 40 meV was chosen because it is the smallest 
broadening that results in a unimodal distribution of eigenenergies 
forming the ensemble-averaged conduction band of the amorphous 
phase. Moreover, this value is more than a factor of six smaller than the 
calculated physical broadening of the ensemble-averaged conduction 
band (250 meV) and, as such, has no effect on it.
To perform averages at an effective temperature, the density of 
states and spectral functions can be weighted by a term e−ΔEi/(kBTeff)/Z, 
where Teff is an effective temperature, ΔE is the energy relative to the 
lowest energy member of the sample (in eV per formula unit) and 
Z=∑ie−ΔEi/(kBTeff) is the partition function of the sample.
It is important to note that the procedure described here is dif -
ferent from the one used to calculate the effective band structure of 
random alloys32 in which the wavefunctions computed on a supercell 
representing an alloy are projected onto the plane waves with wavec-
tors from the Brilloiun zone of the underlying lattice. The main dif -
ference is in the representation of the disorder as a single microstate 
(supercell) in the prior work on alloys and an ensemble of local micro -
states utilized here. In addition to these conceptual differences, the 
single microstate representation would still require large supercells, 
rendering high-accuracy QSGW  calculations challenging.
Calculations of effective mass, linewidth and mobility
Several approaches can be used to characterize the peaks of the spec-
tral functions in order to calculate the effective mass and linewidth of 
the conduction band minimum. The simplest choice is to integrate 
from the Fermi energy to energy at which the integral sums to one. The 
expected value of the peak can be taken as ⟨E⟩=∫a
EfA(k,E)EdE , and the 
linewidth can be taken to be the standard deviation of that distribution, 
σE=⟨E⟩2−∫a
EfA(k,E)E2dE. These functions also display an increasing 
background above the Fermi energy which can be removed, and if that 
background is removed, the value of 〈 E〉 is better aligned with the visual 
peak. Because of high-frequency noise, it is not always straightforward 
to identify the peak as a maximum point. High-frequency noise can be 
removed by performing a Fourier transform, discarding Fourier coef-
ficients with frequencies above a given threshold, and then applying 
an inverse Fourier transform. Identifying peaks by their maxima and 
using their full width at half maximum as the linewidth yields values of 
effective mass, mobility and linewidth that are all close to those 
obtained through integration, both with and without subtracting the 
monotonic background.Data availability
Due to the size of the dataset, the data that support the findings of the 
study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable 
request. Source data are provided with this paper.
References
28. Kresse, G. & Hafner, J. Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid 
metals. Phys. Rev. B 47, 558–561 (1993).
29. Marezio, M. Refinement of the crystal structure of In2O3 at two 
wavelengths. Acta Crystallogr. 20, 723 (1966).
30. Skone, J. H., Govoni, M. & Galli, G. Self-consistent hybrid 
functional for condensed systems. Phys. Rev. B 89, 195112  
(2014).
31. Cunningham, B., Grüning, M., Pashov, D. & van Schilfgaarde, M. 
QSGW: quasiparticle self-consistent GW with ladder diagrams in 
W. Phys. Rev. B 108, 165104 (2023).
32. Popescu, V. & Zunger, A. Effective band structure of random 
alloys. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 236403 (2010).
Acknowledgements
M.J., J.H.M. and V.S. acknowledge support from the US National 
Science Foundation, grant no. DMR-1945010. This work was 
authored in part by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory for 
the US Department of Energy (DOE) under contract no. DE-AC36-
08GO28308. Work by D.P., R.E.L. and M.v.S. was supported by 
the Computational Chemical Sciences programme within the 
Office of Basic Energy Sciences, US Department of Energy. Work 
by V.D. was supported by the US NSF grant no. DMR-2409911, and 
the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory through the NSF 
Cooperative Agreement No. DMR-2128556 and the State of Florida. 
We acknowledge the use of the National Energy Research Scientific 
Computing Center under contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231 using 
NERSC award ERCAP0033575 and the computational resources 
sponsored by the Department of Energy’s Office of Energy Efficiency 
and Renewable Energy and located at the National Renewable Energy 
Laboratory. The views expressed in this article do not necessarily 
represent the views of the DOE or the US Government. The publisher, 
by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the US 
Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide 
licence to publish or reproduce the published form of this work, or 
allow others to do so, for US Government purposes.
Author contributions
M.J. and V.S. conceived the ideas, coordinated this work and wrote the 
paper with input from all other authors. M.J., J.H.M. and V.S. performed 
calculations. All authors contributed to the development of presented 
ideas, discussed the results and commented on the paper.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains 
supplementary material available at  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41567-025-03099-x.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to 
Vladan Stevanović.
Peer review information Nature Physics thanks Anshu Gaur and the 
other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer review 
of this work.
Reprints and permissions information is available at  
www.nature.com/reprints.